---
date: 2021-11-25T16:14:41Z
---

Addendum to previous post...

It occurs to me that what I begin describing toward the end - the capability to migrate between a monolithic and microservice approach - is in a similar vein to something I've wanted to consider anyway... which is that users should own their data; they should be able to export and import it to and from anywhere they please. It's a separate consideration in terms of how it would be developed, but... I just wanted to mention it.

...and I really didn't do full justice to the concept of microservices, which can be so much more fragmented than the fragmentation I did describe. Two apps may share one data store, or one app may call on two or more data stores. The level of scope and fragmentation is largely down to the needs of individual services.

I also want to address that a potential risk of comparing _Unlabel_ to _Marmalade_ is that I may encourage myself to go further with _Unlabel_ than I intended - potentially too far. Interconnectivity was never the purpose of _Unlabel_, as it was with _Marmalade_. I never really intended to do an _Unlabel_ accounting platform as I described in that previous post. The focus was intended to be web administration - a content management system, domain name management, user accounts and interactions like commenting, that sort of thing. I've now conflated my intentions for the two platforms, and I won't deny that there is some crossover... I just need to assess the true focus of _Unlabel_. As I also said in a previous post... I do suck at branding. This here is part of the problem.

And while we're here: Two other projects I have planned that are worth noting. One is called _Credible_ and is an authentication solution. All that talk about _Unlabel_ Auth can be forgotten - Credible is the authentication solution that will power _Unlabel_ apps, _Marmalade_ and... the second project worth mentioning, _Inkpot_. _Inkpot_ is a writing app and risks being overly similar to the _Unlabel_ CMS I would like to develop. But _Inkpot_ has a different focus - it's not web admins and bloggers, it's authors and journalists. It's a writing app with a writing focus, which a CMS would not necessarily have. In fact, a CMS technically has to do so much more. But _Inkpot_, as I envision it, has to do so much that's novel. They do step on one another's toes a little in terms of content publishing, but... I'll talk more about that in the future.

This is a lot to manage, and I have a concept for a project management tool that... belongs somewhere (_Marmalade_ was supposed to feature this)... but I'm no longer quite sure where.

Alas, I'll simply begin and see what emerges.