# Past and Future Projects

## Past Projects

### @Quotable

### @Marmalade

### @Toodles

### @Inkpot

### @TNT

## Current Projects

### ThomBruce.com

@ThomBruceDotCom

### @Nice

### Terminal First Workflow

+terminalFirstWorkflow

Things I've already setup are...

- Neovim
- abook
- Calcurse

Still todo in this regard are...

- Neomutt
- hledger

## Future Projects

### @UntitledOS

The plan is to build my own lightweight operating system setup by way of an ISO.

ArchISO is the first tool I've come across for doing this. It is an Arch tool for creating derivatives of the Arch Linux operating system.

An alternative for Debian exists called Cubic, but it seems the best way to run this would be inside of a Debian OS.

I did already plan to test my OS image using something like VirtualBox or QEMU. Despite the tougher setup, I am leaning towards QEMU as it is closer to the metal and reportedly runs faster.

I could of course also use such a virtual machine to run a Debian distro and therefore run Cubic and create some Debian-derivative instead. And I... might. I might do both.

The aim is to create an operating system with only the barest GUI and a bunch of pre-installed terminal programs and utilities.

We like qView for image gallery browsing.

I'm looking at Zathura for PDF support. Initially, I am installing the mu-pdf extension... but we might decide we prefer poppler... and we might want comic book support too?
There's more infor here: https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Zathura

_Note that installation of Zathura required the selection of a tessdata package. There are more than a hundred, but they are language specific. I went with the tesseract-data-eng package._

### @Inkpot Revived

### @UntitledCalendarApp

...and maybe todos integrated via todo.txt.
