# Not Saying I've Got Impostor Syndrome But...

Here's the thing: I've been programming in some form for over twenty years
and sometimes I feel like I've learned absolutely nothing. We spend so much
of our time incorporating third-party libraries, swapping out third-party
APIs and bouncing between UI frameworks that so much of what I once knew
is now in some form entirely redundant.

_I used to use jQuery. Who uses jQuery anymore?_

I think in some way this feeling is why I've recently been trying to move
myself closer to the bone, so to speak. I've ditched friendly operating
systems and moved to the barebones Arch Linux experience, I've steered
away from fancy UI libraries for my website and I'm trying my hand at
building something from scratch with just Tailwind CSS' utility classes,
and I've abandoned flashy IDEs in favour of tailoring a simpler text editor
(Neovim) to my specific wants and needs.

And in the past few weeks, I've learned a little Bash-fu and have written
half a dozen custom scripts, I've learned more about Linux than I ever knew,
and more about how text editor buffers work than I thought there was to know.
I've also _accidentally_ learned a ton of Vim motions that make my development
experience kind of... a joy... kind of zen. Couldn't necessarily write you a
guide to my motions or tell you what any of them are; they're being learned
like muscle memory, like walking, like breathing. It's nifty.

But okay, that's just the past few weeks. What have I actually learned over my
twenty years developing websites and software?

Um...

Well...

And I think that's a common experience, isn't it? The mind draws a blank.
You know, of course, that you've learned a lot... probably. But can you
immediately name any of it?

I've been rewriting my CV recently too, and this involves trying to recall
a lot about my old roles that, in many cases, hasn't been relevant in years
since. I mentioned jQuery up top. That didn't actually make it onto my CV,
but I remember I wrote it for a lot of personal projects back in the day and
used it professionally for... actually, thinking about it, way longer than I
think the technology was relevant. Perhaps every company I've worked for has
had some jQuery in their codebase... Hm. Actually might still be relevant to
include it on my CV after all.

The thing is, so far as personal dev work goes and indeed so far as my
professional JavaScript contributions go, we have moved on. I know jQuery,
I could dive back in and maintain some legacy code using it, but how relevant
is it to future clients and employers? I dunno.

It feels like a similar story with Bootstrap and Foundation, two CSS frameworks
I've used in the past. Actually both are still kicking around, both are still
extremely popular but... I think maybe it's something to do with having moved
onto a utility class framework like Tailwind CSS that has been blowing up in
popularity and business adoption. It makes those frameworks feel like styling
with training wheels. But that's belittling, and it's untrue--I know it is
because I've used those frameworks, I know how difficult it can be to modify
the provided classes and styles to client specifications. Training wheels?
Hardly! It is actually **harder** to work with those frameworks to match
expectations than it is to do the same thing with utility classes. You get
a lot closer to the desired result a lot more quickly, but then begins a
period of negotiating with the framework while the utility classes of Tailwind
begin to close the gap.

And okay, so there's something I do know. I know about the strengths and
weaknesses different libraries, and when one might choose one over the other,
but most key to the above so far as I'm concerned is this: I know how to two
things really well; read documentation and read source code. Because regardless
of which of those frameworks you do choose, it is ultimately in the docs or in
the source code that you find how to manipulate it to very specific results.

In my typical domain, backend development, there have also been a lot of shifts.
I used to write PHP for WordPress and Joomla (or was it Drupal?), and I don't
do that at all anymore. I think I could dive back in no problem, but I moved
onto Ruby and Ruby on Rails. Packages like Warden, Devise, CanCanCan, Pundit,
Minitest and Rspec have all entered and exited and entered-again my workflow,
and do I feel like I'm an expert in any of them? No, but... we're circling
towards the point that I'm an expert in something else here.

Actually, special shout-out to Devise! That's a great gem. It has been the goto
authentication solution for Rails applications for a very long time. It's also
one of the first backend software extensions that I needed to learn to do _more
than_. Devise is great but when I shifted my own focus towards API development,
I found it lacking in the area of supporting authentication for single page and
mobile apps. Devise is one of the first pieces of software I did a real
deep-dive into the source code of, only to discover that it uses Warden under
the hood, and Warden supported writing custom strategies. I actually wrote my
own authentication gem based on Warden that supported JSON Web Tokens as a an
authentication strategy. So actually yeah, in that regard, I am a bit of a
Devise expert; to most Rails devs, it's a simple drop-in solution for
authentication, but I've dived into the source code there, I know what Devise
really is--an elegant convenience layer providing a Warden strategy and a set
of object and markup templates.

What I'm an expert in then isn't any specific language or syntax. It isn't any
specific framework or library. I can become an expert in any of those, sure. I
can dive into source repositories and _see the code_ like Neo. But as time goes
on and things change, that expertise rusts and it seems I forget I had it at
all (until I remind myself in a series of ramblings like make up this post).
No, I think the specific skill which makes me an expert in my domain is the
diving deep into source code, is the reading documentation. It's the capability
to read, review and adapt.

Impostor syndrome is easy to fall prey to because knowledge moves so quickly.
Much of the raw knowledge that we possess becomes redundant very quickly in our
ever-changing modern world. And the skill that really gets us by is something
that's more abstract. Like if I put "5 years of Vue/Nuxt experience" on my CV,
that's tangible. If I put "highly adaptable" that's something less tangible and
isn't easily demonstrated by a document describing work history. That document
says "Thom knows this, that and this other thing", it doesn't do a good job of
describing my relationship with those things. And well, that's why we have
interviews too, isn't it?

One can feel under-equipped and unsure of themselves easily in professional
careers, because the bases of our technical skills are ever-changing. It is
easy to forget that those skills tell a secondary story, that of our ability
to learn and adapt and to keep delivering.

Is impostor syndrome just a result of looking at our tangible work and
forgetting those abstract talents? I don't know--I certainly don't profess to
be an expert in impostor syndrome. But I do know that I feel better for this
reflection. I feel more "Hell yeah!" about my skills and less "oh, I've
forgotten everything I ever knew".

Feels good. Might reflect again later.
