# KISS Me

_...out of the bearded barley._

Oh dude, I love that song!
But... this post isn't about that.
This post is about the very simple acronym...

**Keep It Simple, Stupid**

Okay, so I actually have a gripe in this general area.
It's late 2025 right now, and Apple have just recently
come out with iOS version 26 which... first of all,
love the new versioning strategy.
Version 26 being relative to the year ahead is a great
idea. Apple iterate on the OS frequently enough that
this makes sense; going forwards you'll always know,
by version number, roughly when a release came out.
My gripe though is the ugly goddamn liquid glass effect
on everything. The dang thing visibly lags, it makes the
UI less readable, and I... I can't turn it off or change
it in iOS 26.0 but apparently it's possible in 26.1
(released a few days ago). Okay, _downloading that now!_

I know I sound like an old man yelling at clouds here,
and genuinely I don't think liquid glass is _ugly_ in an
aesthetic sense--it's pretty--but when it appears to
stutter, when it makes the search bar and various buttons
harder to find, this makes for an ugly experience.

Outside of my phone--here on my website, or at home on my
computer desktop--I've been moving in a very different
direction. I've been doing away with all the bells and
whistles, any unnecesary glitz and glamour, and I've been
trying to reduce my user experience down to the simplest
possible case.

Take a look at my website (if you're reading this, you're
probably there). As I write this, my website is a simple
white-on-black (or black-on-white if you aren't using dark
mode) with little more than a title, some navigation links
and a narrow column in which we show the body of a document.
It's lean, almost ludicrously so, but it's functional and
highly readable. As the developer, it's also incredibly
easy for me to adjust. At the time of writing for instance
that narrow column is aligned all the way to the left on
larger screens, with empty space to the right. You might
notice this alignment on mobile too if you view the site
horizontally. I'm debating whether or not I _want_ to change
that. The look is very familiar to me, a software developer
who spends a lot of time in the terminal with a left-aligned
command prompt--I am forever looking left on my own
screen--but I do wonder about the general user experience.
I might modify that with a simple `margin: 0 auto;`, which
will automatically size the margins either side on the
X-axis and center the document. And because there's nothing
fancy going on here right now (we've got no fancy backgrounds,
no sidebar), I don't have to worry about that simple change
breaking some other part of the document flow.

Simplicity means adaptability.

By starting with something extremely minimalistic, we avoid
all sorts of headaches about interoperability and _will
changing this affect that, do I now need to fix something
else,_ and so on, and so on.

I've adopted a similar approach to managing my desktop
operating system too, having moved recently from a Windows
environment with an Ubuntu sub-system to just... Arch Linux.
Just Arch, which is not "simple" in the sense that it's easy
to set up, but is simple in the sense that it gives you the
minimal amount of setup. It's easier then to load or swap
between different desktop environments or window managers,
because there isn't one provided by default. You don't need
to work out how to replace the default or if any particular
widget is going to disrupt the layout in any way, because
there is none. You're tailoring the experience from scratch,
from the minimum.

I've also moved away from fancy, modern code editors and IDEs
like Virtual Studio Code and... I'm just using Vim now. Neovim
actually, which is a fork of Vim (still minimalist by default)
with a better ecosystem and stronger language for plugins and
extensibility.

When I first gave Neovim a shot, I actually used a premade
setup--the popular option appears to be LazyVim but I went
with LunarVim--which provided a more IDE-like experience.
I've gotta say though... I don't recommend this. I didn't
like the experience. If you're moving from a modern IDE with
a lot of mouse usage, the Vim approach is already going to be
a lot to learn and these premade IDE-like packages just stack
even more on top of that which you'll need to learn too. It's
a little overwhelming. That's why I uninstalled LunarVim and
I instead started using the barebones, the minimal, Neovim
as it came. And I recommend doing this; I recommend getting
comfortable with navigating using the keyboard, entering and
exiting the visual and insert modes, learning a few vim motion
shortcuts and when you find yourself asking _how do I add this
feature?_ only then go looking for the plugin or config which
enables that. I now have a couple-dozen plugins, each of which
addressed a specific need as it came up. And because I installed
these one at a time, I was able to configure the keybinds and
learn them as I went.

Hell, I'm actually thinking of removing a plugin right now.
Telescope is an immensely popular plugin for fuzzy search and
regular expression searches of your files, but... outside of
Neovim, I also have an terminal program called Television
which achieves the same thing and which I can persist in a
separate tab rather than lose the Telescope floating window
buffer. It's a case of... Neovim _was_ my tool for this job,
but now I may have found a better way. The same thing happened
previously with file-exploration. I had been using nvim-tree,
which provides a file tree view in a sidebar within Neovim,
but I've since moved onto using oil.nvim (which isn't as great
for exploring your files, but is a phenomenal way to edit them),
Harpoon (which allows me to effectively favourite some of my
files to quickly jump back to them, and has an oil-like editable
buffer for this list of "favourites"), and outside of Neovim
I'm using Yazi to explore my file-system with Vim-like key
bindings. It's all just very simple, and very modular, and...

Almost accidentally, I'm embracing the Unix philosophy. This is
the idea essentially that each program should do one thing, and
do it well. It should accept inputs from another program and
it should output something usable by another. So here I am
exploring my file system in the terminal, instantiating complex
searches there and opening the found files and directories in
my terminal-based editor, each program doing one thing and doing
it well, then allowing me to take the outputs of one into another.
For a while, I was attempting to get Neovim to try and do all of
this, but it's just not the best tool for some of those jobs.
_Keep it simple, stupid!_ Neovim is a great editor! Television
is a great search utility! Yazi is a great file explorer! tmux
is a great multiplexer! And when you get these things to work
together, it's a beautiful experience.

I love that Arch Linux required me to build my user experience
from the ground up, by providing only the minimum. I love that
the basic Neovim installation did the same thing. In fact I'm
almost a little frustrated that my chosen terminal emulator,
Kitty, does a little too much, some of which has started to get
in the way of shortcuts I've wanted to create to other utilities.
If it weren't for the Kitty Graphics Protocol, I'm pretty sure
I would switch to Alacritty right now, a terminal emulator
celebrated for its minimal feature-set. Alas, I do love seeing
image previews in my terminal (a small but nice convenience when
exploring my file-system in Yazi or adding images to a document
in Neovim). I can, I'm sure, configure Kitty to disable whatever
is getting in my way... but oh my god, the Kitty config file is
**a lot!** Almost 3000 lines! Yikes...

In the meantime, do you know what iOS version 26.1 got me?
Basically nothing. There is now a setting to enable a "Tinted"
version of the liquid glass design pattern, but this has made
no perceptible difference so far as I can see... I'm wondering
if the feature is bugged, because I'm genuinely still seeing all
of the UI elements as transparent as they ever were. Frustrating;
even simplicity isn't simple on iOS right now...

Ah well.

I will in future write some more structured posts about some of my
setup and how I'm embracing the Unix philosophy and the KISS mantra.
Because this is a pattern I very much like, and I'm going to be
slowly tweaking absolutely everything to my specific liking.

That's it for now though. End of post.

_Strike up the band and make the fireflies dance, silver moon's
sparkling..._

_So kiss me._
