# UntitledOS

I have begun work conceptualising my own "operating system" (really, it will be a distribution based on either #ArchLinux or #Debian). The aim is to create a small, somewhat-opinionated ISO that provides some basic tools and to build this using either #Archiso or #Cubic. Probably the former, as Arch is already my daily driver.

What I want from this OS is for it to be a very pared-down experience. Chromeless windows with very little in the way of GUI features at all. That's not to say we're doing without a graphical environment (I still do want it to be possible to view images, documents and browse the web), but the priority in most cases ought to be some application that runs in the terminal. This means favouring programs like...

- Neovim
- Neomutt or aerc
- Calcurse
- Yazi
- btop
- sc-im
- rmpc
- ...

Where it is favourable to open a file or webpage outside of the terminal, I have a few other programs in mind:

- qView for images
- Helium for browsing the web
- Zathura for opening PDFs

With Helium being a slight exception, these are chosen as they offer the most bare experience (no GUI interface, a preference for Vim-like keybindings). Helium is chosen as my preferred browser here because it is _somewhat_ light on features, being just a security-focused chromium-based web browser. I might make a different choice there yet; Helium is just my preferred browser for personal use right now.

As for what the graphical environment is based on... and as for which terminal emulator we choose... probably Kitty for the latter (making use of its kittens feature and the Kitty Image Protocol), and I want the graphical environment to allow for window tiling. There are a few options there... Hyprland, Sway, Niri. I might find there are also simpler options. I also want to experiment with gutterless windows that are essentially all you see (meaning no desktop in a manner of speaking, and quite possibly no desktop background).

What's motivating me to pursue this? No idea... but something about me loves the idea of a distraction-free, ultra-clean distro that ought to run on even the most basic machines.

Some other notable programs/utilities that ought to be integrated:

- SDDM (user login screen), though this is a very graphical solution... perhaps consider CDM (Console Display Manager), Ly (another TUI solution), or other...
- Connection management
- Driver setup
- Some guided install script

